Title: An exciting day for the Ceph community
Date: 2012-05-03 11:10
Slug: an-exciting-day-for-the-ceph-community
Author: florian
Tags: Ceph

Today, as you've probably noticed if you're following the development of
the [Ceph](https://www.hastexo.com/knowledge/storage-io/ceph) stack,
something mighty cool has been happening. The
[ceph.com](http://ceph.com/) web site received a major makeover with a
slick new design, and the people behind Ceph have [announced the launch
of a brand new
company](http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/new-startup-inktank-delivers-the-future-of-storage-with-ceph-1652261.htm)
to drive the Ceph stack, [Inktank](http://www.inktank.com).

As I've previously blogged here, Ceph is [one of the most interesting
storage
technologies](https://www.hastexo.com/blogs/florian/2012/03/08/ceph-tickling-my-geek-genes)
out on the market today – and this includes both open-source and
commercial offerings. It's exceptionally well designed, extremely
scalable, and useful for a frighteningly diverse set of usage scenarios.
Up to this point, Ceph development has been driven and funded by [New
Dream Network](http://newdream.net/), a long-standing hosting provider
operating out of Southern California since 1997 under the
[DreamHost](http://www.dreamhost.com/) brand. Now, it's being launched
into its own company.

Inktank is about to offer professional services and training around the
Ceph stack. I've had the pleasure to meet with Inktank President & COO
Bryan Bogensberger and others at the OpenStack conference in San
Francisco. Indeed, meeting with them was one of my motivations for being
there – besides [high availability in
OpenStack](https://www.hastexo.com/resources/presentations/reliable-redundant-resilient-high-availability-openstack),
of course.

What Inktank enables us to do is to remain involved in the Ceph
community even more than we previously were. We're already offering Ceph
instruction as part of our [High Availability
Expert](https://www.hastexo.com/services/training/hastexo-high-availability-expert)
and [Cloud Bootcamp for
OpenStack](https://www.hastexo.com/services/training/cloud-bootcamp)
training classes. [Martin](https://www.hastexo.com/who/martin) has
[presented Ceph at
CeBIT](https://www.hastexo.com/resources/presentations/glusterfs-und-ceph-skalierbares-storage-ohne-wenn-und-aber)
in Germany this year. He has also just published a well-received
[article on Ceph in the U.S. edition of ADMIN
magazine](http://www.admin-magazine.com/HPC/Articles/The-RADOS-Object-Store-and-Ceph-Filesystem),
and I have another one coming up in next month's Issue 218 of [Linux
Journal](http://www.linuxjournal.com).

So, we're excited for Inktank and wish them the best – even though we
sadly can't be at their [launch party in Las Vegas on May
8](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/always-bet-on-ink-tickets-3311680325).
We appreciate the invitation, guys – have fun!

* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
