Title: linux.conf.au 2014, or My Annual Journey To Awesome
Date: 2014-01-20 11:36
Slug: linuxconfau-2014-or-my-annual-journey-to-awesome
Author: florian
Tags: linux.conf.au, OpenStack

Earlier this month, I got on a flight to Perth, WA to make my annual
trek to **linux.conf.au**, the largest open-source conference in the
Southern Hemisphere and one of my favorite conferences on the circuit.
LCA is an excellent, volunteer-run, hugely insightful conference and
well worth the 26-hour trip.

I arrived in Perth in time to catch part of the Systems Administration
mini-conference on day 1. In particular, I caught a [**systemd**
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jwBdrvEXMk0) by **Rodger
Donaldson** which was both informative and entertaining, so I encourage
you to watch that when you get the chance.

Day 2 had the OpenStack miniconf, which was good but a bit too focused
on OpenStack governance and organizational issues in its first half. In
the afternoon, talks got more technical, which was a clear improvement.

Wednesday talks included a highly entertaining [look at MySQL's
history](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mQKyIAx6Mc) from **Stewart
Smith**, **Dave Chinner**'s musings on where [Linux
filesystems](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxZzSifuV4Q) came from, and
an insightful [RADOS deep
dive](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XyDcYV9doL8) from **Sage Weil.**
There was also a DRBD talk that I was not so fond of, but I've already
shared my thoughts about that one on Google+, and you're certainly
welcome to [take a
look](https://plus.google.com/u/0/+FlorianHaas/posts/KTtvUzmATJM) over
there.

My own [Rapid OpenStack Deployment for Novices and Experts
Alike](http://youtu.be/YWVz1CSxayU) tutorial was on Thursday, had a nice
turnout, and my hands-on stuff all worked! What more could I possibly
ask for?

Besides my own talk, you should also totally watch **Matthew Garrett**'s
[Thursday keynote](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ixMStnFzgRM) and
**Lana Brindley**'s [agile documentation tutorial with Lego
goodness](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HKmaCpOv0Ww). And of course,
my clear favorite among all LCA talks this year, Bdale Garbee's
[reflections on losing his
house](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j7Et_eWJExU) in a wildfire last
year.

As for Friday, again a stellar keynote from **Jonathan Oxer** ([Arduino
satellites in space](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0GHMTXiDqoA), geek
overload), Lennart's [kdbus
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sJyVaKZ8tbc) which you've probably
already [read on LWN](https://lwn.net/Articles/580194/) about, and a
brilliant [lightning
talk](http://mirror.linux.org.au/pub/linux.conf.au/2014/Friday/122-LCA_2014_-_Lightning_Talks_pt2_and_Thanks.mp4)
from Tim Serong about building a DIY bookscanner.

All in all, linux.conf.au in Perth was terrific, as usual, and I am
absolutely planning to be there again next year. The trip will be even
more atrociuous as next year's venue is
[Auckland](http://lca2015.linux.org.au), but it will be totally worth
it. No doubt in my mind at all.

I'd like to extend a huge thank-you to all LCA attendees, fellow
speakers, organizers and volunteers who make this conference a fantastic
event year after year. See you in 2015!

* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
