Title: My 2010s
Slug: my-2010s
Date: 2019-12-31
Summary: I guess at the end of a decade, it’s a good time as any to look back.

This is my look back at the decade we’re just finishing up.[^1]

## Some stats

Besides managing to grow 10 years older, in this decade I founded 1
company, sold 1 company, left 1 company, joined 1 company, folded 0
companies, bankrupted 0 companies, raised precisely €0 of VC, provided
an income to a growing family, kept the bank accounts in the black
throughout, spent 836 days (2 years, 3 months, 2 weeks and 2 days) on
the road, traveled 947,000 kilometers (that’s about the length of a
[circumlunar free
return](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circumlunar_trajectory)
trajectory), visited 144 cities in 32 countries (including airport
stopovers), and gave about 72 talks (on average a little over one
every two months) at conferences and events.

## hastexo

More than half the decade (6 years and 1 month, to be precise) is
occupied by my tenure at hastexo, the company I co-founded and led
from inception to acquisition by [City
Network](https://www.citynetworkhosting.com/). Coming off an excellent
stint at [Linbit](https://linbit.com) — where I worked for 4.5 years,
and which I’m pleased to report is still around, alive, independent
and kicking (a rare feat in this industry) — my co-founders Martin,
Andreas and I bootstrapped a company that operationally broke even in
its third month, and earned its founding cost back in six (while
providing us a livelihood out of operational revenue). Though we never
went through any kind of meteoric rise or exponential growth — hardly
a thing in professional service companies devoid of hockey sticks — we
did make good calls in gaining a foothold in the Ceph and OpenStack
communities early on, and quickly established a reputation as
technical experts.

We parted ways three years in, and if we follow the analogy that that
sort of thing is something like a divorce, this was a particularly
amicable one. All of us are still on good terms, and even occasionally
have the opportunity to collaborate.

hastexo also enabled me to meet my brilliant colleagues
[Adolfo](https://arbrand.es/) (with whom I still work) and
[Syed](https://twitter.com/syedarmani) (who has since done a career
pivot and works in a completely different part of our industry).

## City Network

Making the decision to
[sell](https://www.citynetwork.eu/pressreleases/city-network-shifts-high-gear-hastexo-acquisition/)
hastexo to [City Network](https://www.citynetworkhosting.com/) in 2017
is something that I’ve never regretted. I generally get along very
well with the Scandinavian approach to work — something that I had
learned 10 years earlier when I had the pleasure of interacting
regularly with then-independent [MySQL
AB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MySQL_AB) —, and City Network is no
exception here.

Obviously an integration into an acquirer is never entirely devoid of
friction,[^2] particularly when a fully distributed team meets a
previously fully office-driven company, but our colleagues turned out
to be an excellent bunch and I’m on a very good working basis with my
CEO Johan.

At City Network I’ve also finally succeeded in doing something I’d
always failed at in the years prior, which is to have built a
gender-balanced team. [Namrata](https://twitter.com/namratasitlani)
and [Elena](https://twitter.com/elenalindq) are fantastic assets in a
highly professional, highly functional, and [generally
awesome](https://twitter.com/search?q=from%3Axahteiwi%20MTIA) group.


## People

Apart from the excellent people I get to work with on a daily basis, I
have met an astonishing number of utterly amazing folks in this
decade. In fact, many of them have had so much influence on me that I
find it hard to believe I didn’t even know them a decade ago. It’s
straight-out impossible to list them all, so I’ve representatively
picked three people here.

[Sage Weil](https://twitter.com/liewegas) of [Ceph](https://ceph.io)
fame is possibly the strongest pairing of brilliance and humility
you’ll ever encounter. How many people do you know that [made fuck-you
money](https://www.redhat.com/en/about/press-releases/red-hat-acquire-inktank-provider-ceph)
from something they thought up in [their PhD
thesis](https://ceph.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/weil-thesis.pdf),
then took some of that fuck-you money as [a donation to their alma
mater](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/news/article/2349) where it endows a
professorship _that [their PhD advisor now
holds](https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/news/article/2402)?_[^3] It’s an
absolute privilege to know this guy.

[Marco Ostini](https://twitter.com/marcoostini) is, and will always
be, the face of
[linux.conf.au](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux.conf.au) for me,
and I need to mention him here for his own sake and that of the
community he is a part of. When I arrived for [my very first
LCA](https://2011.linux.conf.au/) in 2011, as a completely
inexperienced traveler, fatigued, jet-lagged and bleary-eyed as all
hell, there was this wonderful Aussietalian with a beaming smile
giving me the warmest of welcomes _at half-past midnight_ and
cheerfully gave me a lift to the accommodation. LCA 2011 was my best
conference up to that point, ran what _still_ appears to be [my most
popular conference talk](https://youtu.be/NyHJ8Uf03qg) (largely thanks
to [Tim Serong](https://ourobengr.com/)’s live cartooning), and kicked
off a series of LCAs for me that were always a warm fuzzy
shot-up-the-arm of Aussie and Kiwi hospitality in the middle of the
dark European winter. Not to mention the talks. And
Pac-Man. And hugs.

[Sharone Revah Zitzman](https://twitter.com/shar1z) has been my
constant and unbroken link to the Israeli cloud, open source, and
DevOps community. Sharone is basically a conference organizing
committee on two feet, and an incredibly nice and welcoming person to
boot. I’ve forged many friendships in the Israeli developer community
that would never have happened were it not for her, and I love coming
back to her neck of the woods for that reason.


## Me

Honestly, I really dislike reading old emails (whether I sent them in
private or to public mailing lists) from the early 2010s, because they
remind me that more than occasionally I was abrasive to the point of
being an outright jerk. I hope that that has improved somewhat.

I think I did pretty well in the “immersing myself in new technology
and keeping current in it” department. At the start of the decade I
knew next-to-nothing about Ceph, OpenStack hadn’t even started, and
Open edX wasn’t yet under the AGPL. Today I feel kinda-sorta-OK in two
of those, and not-quite-an-idiot in the other, which is about as happy
as I’ll ever be with my limited knowledge of anything.

I’ve also *finally* allowed myself to feel reasonably comfortable
about what I do as a manager, even if it means deviating from
conventional wisdom or established precedent.

So let’s see what the next decade holds. Happy new year, everyone!


[^1]: Yes, I know. It’s arbitrary. Gregorian calendar yada yada, plus
	the discussion whether the decade ends at the end of 2019, or the
	end of 2020. I don’t care. Now is as good as any time to look back
	and reflect.

[^2]: I should really do a conference talk for startup founders on what
	to expect when you’re being acquired one day.


[^3]: That’s pretty awesome academia bragging rights for the professor,
	too. 
