Title: On my (ex-)maintainership of the DRBD User's Guide
Date: 2012-03-20 11:01
Slug: on-my-ex-maintainership-of-the-drbd-users-guide
Author: florian
Tags: DRBD

Here's a quick summary of my past and current relationship with the DRBD
User's Guide.

As you probably know, I created the original [DRBD User's
Guide](http://drbd.linbit.com/users-guide/) several years back, and I
maintained it throughout my time at Linbit. [When I left last
year](https://fghaas.wordpress.com/2011/09/05/on-to-new-endeavors/), it
was originally mutually understood (or so I thought) that I could
continue to maintain it – as a non-employee, in a community capacity,
without compensation, just as it's common in many other open source
projects. I tend to enjoy technical writing, and it was something I
certainly was looking forward to. And things got off to a promising
start, the first (trivial) patch to the documentation which I
[submitted](http://lists.linbit.com/pipermail/drbd-dev/2011-September/001684.html)
in my new life [was quickly merged without
issue](http://git.drbd.org/gitweb.cgi?p=drbd-documentation.git;a=commit;h=35d41237aea064686ee21621b9fb1b9111a4424c).

When I made my
[second](http://lists.linbit.com/pipermail/drbd-dev/2011-November/001987.html)
and
[third](http://lists.linbit.com/pipermail/drbd-dev/2011-November/001999.html)
submission to the documentation, the latter of which was a a bit more
elaborate, things got a bit strange. This was after hastexo went
operational, although whether that is at all related to the sequence of
events I don't know. At any rate, I was being served with a
"Documentation Contributor License Agreement". Which wasn't considered
necessary in my earlier patch. Which involved copyright assignment.
Which I balked at. I don't necessarily object to copyright assignment if
I write on a contract, as I occasionally do for technical magazines --
but what I wrote definitely hadn't been contracted out to me. I had
simply submitted it unsolicited in the mere hope it was going to be
useful, and I wasn't interested in contract work, either. In addition,
the documentation was (and is) under a [liberal CC-BY-SA
license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) which made any
copyright assignment unnecessary for a simple contribution. In my humble
opinion, that is.

So I raised these points, and my concerns were rejected, and my patches
didn't make it in. Note, I have no quarrel with this at all – it may
well be a perfectly sane business decision. But that's none of my
business anymore, and I respect their decision just fine. They have
stuck to their decision, and that is just fine too.

It only means that I don't maintain the User's Guide anymore, and I'm
evidently also unable to contribute patches, corrections or improvements
unless I consent to copyright assignment, which I disagree with in this
instance. So unless the policy changes at some point in the future, I
won't be contributing to the User's Guide any longer.

My name will remain in the authors list pretty much indefinitely (unless
someone publishes a complete rewrite) as that is required by law, but
you should interpret that as my being the original author – technically
a co-author, as I always made a point of crediting Lars' and Phil's
earlier work that the User's Guide was based on. My co-authorship
doesn't imply, however, that I'm a currently active author or
maintainer.

 



* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
