Title: On the merits of working from home, in a distributed virtual team
Date: 2012-12-06 17:38
Slug: on-the-merits-of-working-from-home-in-a-distributed-virtual-team
Author: florian
Tags: Philosophy

During lunch at the EMEA OpenStack day in London this week, I had a
brief but excellent conversation with fellow OpenStacker [Adam
Spiers](https://twitter.com/adamspiers) from SUSE. Our chat turned to
the merits of working from home, and he encouraged me to write up a blog
post about some of the ideas of mine and of my co-founders' which we
have since made hastexo policy, however informal or unwritten.

Note that much of what follows aren't necessarily original ideas of
ours. Many of my thoughts I owe to some very insightful chats I've had
over the past few months with the delightful [Sarah
Novotny](http://sarahnovotny.com/), original co-founder of [Blue
Gecko](http://bluegecko.com/), seasoned
[OSCON](http://www.oscon.com/oscon2012) conference chair and now CIO at
[Meteor Entertainment](http://meteor-ent.com/). If you get a chance to
talk to Sarah at a conference and poll her views on this, I can highly
recommend you seize that chance.

It all starts with the observation that the separation of the place you
live in, and the place you work at, is a fairly recent concept in human
history. Prior to the [Industrial
Revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Revolution), which
originated in late 18th century England and steamrolled first Europe and
then the rest of the world, no such separation was common: the
blacksmith would live upstairs in his shop, so would the bakerman or the
butcher. The teacher would dwell, with his family, in the local school.
The farmer, and the farmhands, would live on that farm. In such a
setting it follows naturally that the work day spans essentially your
entire waking time: you would start your day's work as soon as you got
up, and finished it when you retired for the night. It would be equally
natural to close the shop and interrupt your work for perhaps an hour at
a time, in order to consume a meal with your family or run an errand, or
to hold the *[siesta](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siesta)* common in
the Mediterranean to pass the hottest hours of the day.

Then with the Industrial Revolution, everything changed. In the name of
efficiency and progress, we decided that we had to pool workers in one
place — called a factory, or perhaps a shipyard — because now we needed
collaboration: one person could no longer fulfill the task alone, so we
had to get many people to one place to fulfill it together. And as a
natural continuation of our pre-industrial routine, people would work
ten to twelve hours a day, six days a week — until we realized that it
started messing up our lives, inflicting misery on our families and
social ties. And we invented a new concept called spare time: time we
could spend by ourselves, or with our families and friends, something we
didn't have to ask for in the pre-industrial age when our work and life
would naturally have been integrated. And we gradually got to “advances”
like first the
[10-hour](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffalo_switchmen%27s_strike)
workday, then the 8-hour workday, then the 40-hour [work
week](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workweek) when we decided it would be
better to have a rest of two days a week rather than one.

Then we invented white-collar, office jobs, and we gradually moved from
an industry-dominated to a service-dominated economy. And because by
this time we were all well trained in the rules of industrial life, and
because it had brought us progress and prosperity, we applied the same
concepts to offices that we previously had applied to factories and
shipyards: we would gather everyone in the same place, removed from home
and families, and we would get everyone to accept fixed “office hours”
when all hands would have to be present. Of course, we still needed to
collaborate, it's just that the tasks differed from the ones we faced in
factories and shipyards.

Fast forward to the early 21st century, where we are suddenly endowed
with an abundance of readily available, cheap technology that allows us
to communicate and collaborate instantly, from almost anywhere. And it
is at this point that the unnatural split between work and non-work
life, which we inflicted upon ourselves during the Industrial Revolution
and which we have managed to rationalize with the brainwash that a
“clean separation” of “work and private life” is “essential” to
well-being — that has become a complete anachronism. It is no longer
vital for the people making up a company to physically be in the same
place to collaborate, to serve customers, and to be productive and make
a difference to communities. In fact, I consider it counterproductive.
We've finally arrived in a position where we can restore the very
natural way for humans to live and work, namely integrated with our
families, from home, connected through technology that enables us to
communicate just as effectively as sitting at the same desk. It also
enables us to live healthier, better lives.

I'm fully aware that this style of work is probably not for everyone.
But if you're thinking it's not for you (and I was one of those, until a
little over a year ago) it's worth asking yourself *why* you're thinking
that. Is it really because you *want* to work in an office, or because
everyone has *told you* for most of your career that you want to work in
an office?

Here at hastexo, it took us some time — several months — to figure out
all-electronic collaboration, but the machinery is working extremely
well now. The [Google Apps](https://www.google.com/work/apps/business/)
stack has been enormously useful for us in that regard. We practically
live in [Google Hangouts](http://www.google.com/+/learnmore/hangouts/)
and documents shared on [Google Drive](http://drive.google.com). We jot
down ideas in Google Docs and sketch architectures in Google Drawings.
We do our weekly standups that way, and increasingly customer meetings,
too. We collaboratively draft and edit slide decks for training. And we
rehearse conference talks via video call. It just works, and it's huge
fun that way. And it enables us to close our laptops and go read bedtime
stories to our kids when we're done.



* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
