Title: Let's Make A Politburo!
Date: 2022-04-30
Slug: politburo
Tags: Work, Communications, Satire
Summary: Need a shakeup in leadership? Want to restructure your organization's leadership? Here's one way to do it.

Suppose your organization needs a shakeup in leadership. Perhaps the
company has outgrown its founders, or they have found new interests
and want to move on. Or maybe it was recently spun off from its parent
company, and needs to stand on its own feet now. Or maybe it's just
grown big enough that autocratic, single-person leadership is no
longer viable.

Now, there are multiple ways to address this. You could bring in a new
CEO. Hire a COO that takes the day-to-day running of the business off
the CEO's shoulder. Install a broader C-suite. Organize the company
into divisions, each led by a person in charge of all aspects of the
division, and fully and personally responsible and accountable for it.

But suppose you don't want that. And you'd quite like your company to
be more democratic. Not necessarily *really* democratic — that would
be a stretch — but maybe "democratic" as in ["German Democratic
Republic"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/East_Germany).

In that case, there is an alternative to common capitalist corporate
leadership: the Politburo. Hey, it worked in the Soviet Union, surely
you can make it work in your corporation!

So, how do we get started with our politburo?

1. **Form a small, homogeneous group.** In order to function well and
   ensure harmonious operations, a politburo should be largely
   homogeneous. For best results, assemble a single-gender group whose
   age range spans no more than 15 years or so — say, approximately 40
   to 55. The absolute age is of lesser importance; homogeneity is
   what matters. You can form a politburo of under-30s if you so
   choose (and if you are one yourself). If you're unsure about whom
   to include in your politburo, simply look into a mirror and appoint
   (or hire) people who look superficially similar.

2. **Adopt a meeting schedule.** The politburo must meet on a
   regular basis as it is the core decision-making entity of the
   organization. Establish a regular schedule on which the politburo
   meets, ideally once a week, but certainly no less frequently than
   once a month. Ensure that the entirety of the organization is aware
   of the meeting schedule. Furthermore, ensure that the time allotted
   to meetings is ample. The politburo may well have to meet for a
   total of 12 hours per month, no matter the frequency of meetings.

3. **Establish a dedicated bureaucracy.** All politburo meetings must
   follow an established format, and follow a process (preferably one
   identified by a three or four letter acronym). Any petitions for
   the politburo must follow a special format, and be received by a
   politburo member, so that that member can assess its merit, sponsor
   it, and/or discuss it with other members of the politburo. Also,
   politburo meetings must be recorded in the form of meeting minutes
   — ideally using a special minutes format not used for any other
   meetings in the organization.

So, you've formed a politburo. Congratulations! Now how do you operate
it?

1. **Meet in secret.** It is of utmost importance that the
   deliberations of the politburo remain confidential. Minutes of
   politburo meetings are for the eyes of members only, and must never
   be shared with rank-and-file members of the organization — although
   they may still be used for lawsuits and audits, and for research by
   interested historians few decades in the future. This secrecy
   enables several functions essential to the politburo: any member
   can plausibly argue having supported or opposed a specific petition
   when they have not, all members can uphold the pretense that an
   issue was thoroughly discussed when it was passed or rejected
   without discussion, and no member is accountable for incorrect
   assumptions or even foolish misjudgments, which might be easily
   pointed out by an informed reader of the minutes. Naturally, the
   politburo must avoid such embarrassment at all cost. Secrecy will
   naturally help the politburo maintain an air of elevated
   professionalism.

2. **Issue general guidelines.** The politburo is most effective when
   it makes vague, general, nonspecific pronouncements, and leaves
   them open to interpretation by lower ranks in the organization (the
   people who actually get things done). As such, it should never be
   getting too deep into specifics. When flaws or ambiguities in any
   guidelines are pointed out by lower ranks, the politburo should
   respond with a cross-reference to a different but similarly vague
   guideline, and assert that that clearly resolves the deficiency in
   the other. Whether or not this is actually the case is of lesser
   importance.  
   Sometimes, stubborn lower ranks insist on the existence of an
   inconsistency, and call for it to be resolved. In that event the
   politburo should recognize that such troublemakers cannot be
   convinced, and should instead be confused. In that case, the
   politburo should advise the imminent promulgation of a third
   guideline to remove the conflict between the existing two, and then
   indefinitely delay its publication.

3. **Diffuse responsibility.** Under no circumstances can any
   member of the politburo assume personal responsibility for any
   decision that the politburo makes. The politburo acts as a
   collective body, and as such has collective responsibility and
   authority.

4. **Deflect and defer calls for transparency.** Secrecy and
   confidentiality add to the politburo's air and mystique, and must
   obviously be preserved under any and all circumstances. This is
   frequently at odds with recently popular misgivings about
   organizational efficiency, which highlight the importance of
   "transparency." Where it is not practical to silence adherents of
   such tomfoolery, the politburo must appease and sedate them with
   insinuations of transparency measures that will be implemented
   "soon" (ideally, next quarter or next financial year, or in a given
   month — cleverly omitting the year, of course).

5. **Promote obtuse and opaque metrics to simulate progress.** Since
   the politburo acts in secrecy and promulgates only vague general
   guidelines, it is under an obligation to uphold an impression of
   progress in the absence of real results. To do so, the politburo
   must adopt metrics reflecting its constant improvement. Such
   metrics should preferably be pseudoscientific, completely opaque to
   anyone except their inventor, dimensionless in nature, and should
   sport a fashionable acronym. "Aggregated Decision-Making Immediacy
   Norm" (ADMIN) would be a fictitous but entirely suitable
   example. Scores published for the politburo's own performance under
   this metric should improve over time in a linear fashion with a
   slow increase. Graphs containing a plot of the metric, when
   published, should use unlabeled axes.

6. **Highlight the superiority of the politburo method.**
   Periodically, highlight the economic, moral, and scientific
   surpemacy of the politburo model over all other modes of
   leadership.

And there you have it. With 3 simple steps and 6 simple rules, you too
can implement a leadership method whose Step To Rule Ratio (STRR) is
0.5, exceptionally close to the scientifically established ideal value
of 0.42. So do not dither or delay, make a politburo today!