Title: Rules are rules
Date: 2021-09-16
Slug: rules-are-rules
Tags: Communications, Work
Summary: I have a reputation for being rigid when it comes to communication rules. Here's why I am.

I have a reputation among my colleagues that I am very strict and
rigid about the communications rules I follow for myself, and for my
team. That reputation is entirely deserved, and I am indeed not
particularly flexible in my strong preference for asynchronous,
non-interruptive communication methods. I have discussed
[elsewhere](https://youtu.be/CyzoF7mHEBo), and [at
length]({filename}../resources/presentations/froscon2020.md), what
those are and *why* I have that strong preference. But I haven't
really outlined why I very rarely allow myself, or others if I can
help it, to deviate from it.

But Florian, the complaint usually goes, can't you occasionally make
an exception? Sometimes there's something you could easily do to
unblock someone else, if they could only quickly chat you up and ask
you to jump in. You'd be in and out of there in no time.

## Let's use an analogy here.

Suppose you're out of an indispensable food product, say milk or flour
or potatoes or eggs. So you make a quick run to the grocery store, and
because you don't live in a country with proper cycling infrastructure
and the store is out of walking distance, you drive.

You arrive at the grocery store parking lot, and for some unfathomable
reason it's chock full. Completely packed. Not a single spot
available. Except those two spots right near the store entrance that
are reserved for wheelchair users, which you are not. You don't see a
single car around with a wheelchair plaque or decal. Not even one.

Now. When you look at the situation, the objectively simplest and most
practical solution is for you to park in a wheelchair spot. You know
exactly how long it takes you to buy a carton of eggs; you'd be in and
out of that place in two minutes. The chance that one car needing a
wheelchair spot arrives in exactly that time is minute, and even then
there would be another one available. The probability of *two*
wheelchair users arriving in their cars, simultaneously, in those two
minutes, is infinitesimal. There is an overwhelming probability that
you will vacate the spot again, without it ever being needed by one of
its intended users while you were occupying it. So, why not use it?

The answer is that if it's OK for *you* to break the rule that that
spot is for wheelchair users only, *there is absolutely no reason why
it shouldn't also be OK for everyone else.* You're not special, the
same rules apply to you as to everyone else — so if we were to decide
that this rule *doesn't* apply to you this very minute, then it also
needn't apply to anyone else under similar circumstances.

And then, promptly, we're in a situation where everyone flouts the
rules, and an actual wheelchair user can no longer do their grocery
shopping. That's why you, if you are not a wheelchair user, shouldn't
park there, and nobody else that isn't shouldn't either.

And with interruptive communications — such as pinging someone in a
chat when you could send them an email just the same — it's much the
same way: if you needlessly ping me and I acquiesce, drop the thing
I'm doing, and focus on your interruption instead, it would be unfair
of me to not do the same for somebody else. And I know if *everyone*
does this to me, my work day is purely interrupt driven and that's
awful. The same goes for tolerating interruptive communications
towards my team — or, worse, engaging in such interruptive
communications myself.

## Are there exceptions to this rule?

Ah but of course. Let me take you back to the grocery store. Suppose
someone had a heart attack or other major health emergency that struck
them down right as they were exiting the store and walking back to
their car. Would anyone — including a wheelchair-using motorist that
arrived just at that moment to do their shopping — complain if the
ambulance parked across *both* wheelchair accessible spots, if that
was the only practical way to get closest to the patient? I hope
not. And caring for the patient and stabilising them for the trip to
the hospital would surely take longer than your two-minute egg
procurement dash that we discussed earlier.

Again, this has a parallel in interruptive communications in a (much
less dire) regular work situation: stuff is actually on fire? Or
there's something that for some legitimate reason needs doing *right
now* that only I or someone on my team can do, or is most comfortable
with? Ping me in chat, use the back channel, give me a ring on my
*phone* for cryinoutloud, whatever it takes to get my
attention. Nobody will hold that against you, least of all me. And in
this case that's a rule that I can *also* easily apply generally,
treating everyone around me fairly and equitably: when stuff is urgent
and seriously overrides the priority of what's currently being worked
on, you get to interrupt me or, if necessary anyone on my
team. (Though I would prefer that you interrupt me specifically, and I
can decide whether we really need to mobilise another person.)

Just don't abuse that. If you do, you'll just condition people into
taking your sense of "urgent" with a big pinch of salt.

* * *

*Edit, 2021-09-21:*

My colleague [Jean-Philippe Evrard](https://be.linkedin.com/in/evrardjp)
has suggested that I refer to another, much more elaborate article on
a similar subject: Siderea's *[The Asshole
Filter](https://siderea.dreamwidth.org/1209794.html)*. I recommend you
give it a read if you're inclined.
