Title: Speaking and BoFing at CloudOpen in San Diego!
Date: 2012-08-20 07:26
Slug: speaking-and-bofing-at-cloudopen-in-san-diego
Author: florian
Tags: Ceph, Conference, high availability, OpenStack

Next week, I will be speaking at the inaugural CloudOpen conference in
San Diego. This is your chance to learn about
[OpenStack](https://www.hastexo.com/knowledge/openstack) high
availability and
[Ceph!](https://www.hastexo.com/knowledge/storage-io/ceph)

August 29-31, San Diego hosts the
first [CloudOpen](http://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/cloudopen-north-america)
conference, colocated with [LinuxCon North
America](http://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/linuxcon-north-america).
CloudOpen is the [Linux Foundation](http://www.linuxfoundation.org/)'s
brand new, stack-agnostic cloud conference where OpenStackers can mingle
with CloudStackers and Eucalyptus folks to discuss open-source cloud
solutions.

It's also the conference where I will be giving my fourth (and likely
last, at least for the time being) incarnation of the High Availability
for OpenStack talk I first delivered at the Folsom design summit back in
April. Since then, we've had a lot of community involvement for HA in
OpenStack, and have made some excellent progress, and I will be more
than happy to report on that. This presentation is on [Thursday,
2:25-3:10pm in Executsoemive Center Room
2](http://cloudopen2012.sched.org/event/06939ee7fd5fe48bf202525bbd7e506d#.UDIX9hXwh2M),
in the *Operations* track.

Also, [Sage Weil](http://ceph.com/community/people-profile/sage-weil/)
of Ceph fame is joining me for an birds-of-a-feather (BoF) session on
Ceph. [Ross Turk](http://rtrk.us/) and I had such an excellent turnout
(and a great time) in the Ceph BoF at OSCON that we just had to do
another. And Sage agreed to take part, which is excellent. He has [a
talk on Ceph in the main conference
track](http://cloudopen2012.sched.org/event/f3e84388068b1855c5a705a97c917f44#.UDIZeBXwh2M)
as well.

The conference organizers do not announce BoF sessions ahead of time on
the CloudOpen web site, so I've simply [set up a Google+
event](https://plus.google.com/events/cq28o7cvj9dg1ki1om3clfo8700/110443614427234590648)
for you to check in on. The exact location is still TBD (we will be
assigned a room based on availability), but we will definitely be in the
conference area at the Sheraton in San Diego. If you're attending
CloudOpen and you want to learn more about Ceph, you're more than
welcome to join us!

My personal CloudOpen schedule is available
[here](http://cloudopen2012.sched.org/fghaas), by the way. Feel free to
grab me at a talk, or in the hallway. See you in San Diego!

* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
