Title: Team meetings
Date: 2019-06-06
Slug: team-meetings
Author: florian
Tags: Philosophy
Summary: Distributed teams need to meet in person every once in a while. Here are some thoughts and suggestions on team meetings.

I’ve run a distributed team — nominally the same team, though through
people joining and leaving I am the sole original band member at this
point — for almost 8 years. And about 3 years in was the first time we
were sufficiently spread *and* had enough money to spare to warrant
flying everyone to the same place for one week per year. We have been
doing that ever since. Every year, it’s an exceedingly enlightening
and pleasant experience.

And this year was the first time that we did not one but **two** team
meetings back to back: first with my core team running education
services at City Network, in the
[Hellerup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellerup) neighborhood in
[Copenhagen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copenhagen), and then as
part of the complete City Network all-hands meeting on the island of
Tjärö in the [Blekinge
archipelago](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blekinge_archipelago).

So here is how we do these things.

## Accommodation

Except for the very first team meeting we did in 2014 when we put
everyone up in hotel rooms, we’ve always rented a house. I’m a
believer in small team sizes — 5 people being the maximum number of
direct reports a leader can realistically have —, so that means that
we *can* still find houses where everyone has a room to themselves,
and nobody has to queue for a shower.

I consider both of these things extremely important. Many, many people
working in tech are introverts, even more so for people working *from
home* in tech. Many of us find the experience of constantly being
around people emotionally draining, and we need solitude to
recharge. Also, privacy. Our personal lives don’t stop while we’re
having a team meeting, so you might want to have a room in which you
can talk about your kid’s health issue with your spouse, without
concern about colleagues overhearing the conversation.

Price-wise, since this puts us in an accommodation category that can
qualify as a penthouse or mansion, this won’t be significantly cheaper
than hotel accommodation — but it won’t be *more* expensive either,
and it’ll be a much nicer experience. Particularly if you also have
the joy of interacting with an exceedingly pleasant, nice, and helpful
person for a host.

As for *who* scouts the accommodation, my rule has always been this:

* In case we have a person on the team who lives, or has lived, in the
  city we’re going to, and who thus is very familiar with the locality
  and surroundings, I delegate the search to them. You can never beat
  local personal experience.

* Otherwise, I do the scouting on the web, and I usually run it by the
  team — after I have made the booking, but while we can still cancel
  or change.


## Arrival

Whoever did the scouting for the accommodation travels a day
early, gets the key, settles in, and reports back. This has multiple
purposes:

* If they are local and so is the host, *of course* that’ll facilitate
  matters a lot. Particularly if we’re in a country where that one
  team member speaks the language, and the rest of us don’t.

* If there’s something seriously wrong with the property, they can
  still cry foul and we can make other arrangements while we’re not
  all congregated in the same spot. (This has never happened to us,
  but just in case.)

* That person is our support backstop who can field issues and
  customer questions, while everyone else is in the air.

* That person can also meet and collect people at the airport or train
  station, if getting to our accommodation is nontrivial or
  difficult. Also, this is particularly helpful when we have a new
  team member who is perhaps less travel experienced.



## First day

I normally don’t schedule any formal work sessions for the first
day. People will be jet-lagged and fatigued from travel, we are often
re-meeting in person for the first time in a year, and there is a lot
of catching up to do about family, hobbies, recent travel, and all
sorts of things that are not work. Somebody might be new and we might
see them for the first time ever, in person.

And then of course people might be delayed in travel, may have had
flights cancelled, or may have missed connections. So that means if
you’re actually *planning* the first day to be full of “work”
sessions, you ran a significant chance of your schedule getting
wrecked by a flight delay. So we just don’t do that. Instead, we try
to make the first day as relaxed and as enjoyable as possible,
including a nice first group dinner.

And then sometimes, as happened this year, a *remarkably* serious and
productive discussion over work issues ensues over a glass of wine in
the evening. But that’s not part of the expectation.


## Work sessions

We tend to have half-day work sessions these days, where we focus on
one topic for 3-4 hours straight. These can get intense, and sometimes
heated, but they are nearly always very, very productive.

We typically use a place like our house’s kitchen (if it’s roomy, and
has a table), or patio (if it’s bearable outside), or sitting room (if
it’s cozy) for work sessions. They are usually quite analog, with
frequently just one person — the assigned record-keeper, often me —
with a laptop open to take notes and record the discussion and its
outcomes. I’ve found that on occasion, when discussing complex issues,
working with a roll of brown paper and thick felt-tip markers
(“sharpies” for you Americans out there) can be *much* more useful
than with anything pushing bits.


## Food

I enjoy food, and I’ve never worked with anyone who doesn’t. So we
make that part enjoyable in whatever way we fancy. We might go for
lunch to the neighborhood bagel store that our host recommended for
their excellent pastrami. We might jump on a train to get to a street
food spot, or head out for pizza or tacos or curry.

And I’m buying. These meetings are for work, my team is traveling for
just that purpose, so whenever we eat together (and we practically
always do), the tab is on me. What I can put on the company and what
comes out of my own pocket is my job to sort out later, but we’re
definitely not going Dutch.


## Interesting things

Our meetings are usually in an interesting city with art,
architecture, and history, and not seeing any of that would be a bit
of a waste. So there’s usually maybe two to three things that we just
go and do. It could be a harbor or river cruise, a visit to a castle
or palace, a bicycle tour criss-crossing the city, or a museum
visit. Depends a bit on the weather and a bit on individual interest.


## Epilogue: going larger

So what works for a 5-person team clearly doesn’t work for a whole
company, not least because you’ll be hard pressed to find a rental
home with 40 bedrooms — I guess such a dwelling would be appropriately
referred to as a palace, and last I checked the Queen wasn’t on
Airbnb.

But you can take a page out of City Network’s playbook and do
something else, which is to book an island. Yes, you read that right,
immediately after our *team* meeting we packed up and boarded a train
to join our *company* all-hands meeting, in which we had an island
practically to ourselves. 
