Title: Thoughts on "ecosystems"
Date: 2012-12-16 14:47
Slug: thoughts-on-ecosystems
Author: florian
Tags: Philosophy

Over the past couple of years, it seems that the term *ecosystem* is
being broadly applied to what we previously called a *community.* I
don't like that, and here's why.

The origin of the term *ecosystem,* when applied to the environment in
which a software project is being developed, used and promoted, is
unknown, at least to the best of my knowledge. Some say that it was
[Brian Aker](http://krow.net/ "Brian Aker") who first spoke of “the
MySQL ecosystem”, and it seemed rather fitting at the time. Presently
though, it seems there's ecosystems everywhere: the Linux ecosystem, the
OpenStack ecosystem, the Python ecosystem, you name it.

And it annoys me.

It annoys me not in the way marketing drone babbling annoys me, like
when someone waxes lyrical about synergies or paradigm shifts — that's
the kind of fluff you automatically filter out and disregard, a bit like
page numbers in the slide decks of presenters stuck in the 20th century.
But the ecosystem thing is frequently used also by developers and users,
the actual movers and shakers, in the way we would previously use
*community.*

Now let's look for a moment at how a community works. A community is
governed by rules and morals. Those can be explicit, as written-down
laws, covenants or contracts. Much more commonly though, they are
implicit: everybody understands them, everybody is expected to abide by
them, and if you break them, you're being shunned — but there's no
requirement to write these rules down.

When we think about communities, most will naturally associate this with
a large group of people, like a clan or tribe, maybe a few hundred or
even a few thousand individuals. Puny, right? We need something grander,
something that alludes to hundreds or thousands of species with maybe
millions of individuals playing a part. Let's pick a term: *ecosystem.*
Yay! Problem solved. Waaaay bigger than a community. So much more
awe-inspiring.

But guess what: **an ecosystem is fundamentally amoral.** In an
ecosystem, there is no right or wrong — other than survival being right,
and if it happens to be at everyone else's expense, that doesn't make it
wrong. From the inside perspective of an ecosystem, if an invasive
species intrudes and steamrolls the entire habitat, so be it: it just
changed the ecosystem. Nature shrugs. Nature also shrugs at parasites,
disease, deception, camouflage, poison, and gangs of predators
collaborating with swift and deadly force to mercilessly kill a
defenseless herbivore.

Now you're welcome to call me out on my naïveté, and point out that it
is precisely those things that happen in business every day. I am
acutely aware of that. I believe, however, we ought to consider them
evils, and some may consider them *necessary* evils at times. They
shouldn't the foundations on which we build our *communities.*

[Words matter.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speech_acts) I think we
should use them wisely.



* * *

This article originally appeared on my blog on the `hastexo.com` website (now defunct).
