Title: Voice messages
Date: 2021-12-05
Tags: Work, Communications, Accessibility
Slug: voice-messages
Summary: Apparently, some people think you should replace professional textual communications with voice messaging. Here’s why I think that that’s a bad idea.

As of late, I've noticed that when people share one of my articles on
asynchronous communications on Twitter (particularly any from the
[Getting out of Meeting
Hell]({filename}getting-out-of-meeting-hell.md) series, or the one on
[meetings that should have been an
email]({filename}this-meeting-should-have-been-an-email.md)), there's
a reply from a brand account that likes to plug/advertise their
service. That service recommends that synchronous meetings be replaced
by “asynchronous meetings” based on voice messages.

I’d like to point out that I consider that an utterly terrible idea.

Let me explain why.

## Voice is slow

First, voice messages suffer from the exact same drawback that
meetings do: they are incredibly slow. Most of us speak at a rate of
[approximately 4 syllables per
second](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speech_tempo).[^speech-tempo] In
English, that translates to about 120-140 words per minute. That means
that as a listener, you *absorb* the content of a voice message at the
same rate. You *might* make that a little more efficient by increasing
playback speed, but that’s only feasible to about a 25% speed
increase, which lands you around 150 words per minute.

[^speech-tempo]: Fun useless fact: the rate of 4 syllables per second
    is practically universal across spoken languages. How many *words*
    a native speaker of a particular language speaks in a minute
    depends largely on the average number of syllables per word in
    that language.

In contrast, unless you are dyslexic (I’ll get to that in a bit) you
can *read* at 240 words per minute.

In other words, conveying a certain amount of information by voice
takes nearly twice as long as doing the same in writing. And that’s if
your verbal expression is *perfect,* which it never is — any voice
message will come with its fair share of filler words (“uh”, “um”,
“y’know”) and incomplete sentences. 

Add to that the occasional slurred word or phrase, or idioms
unfamiliar to the recipient of the message. If you come across
something that’s unclear while reading, it takes you fractions of a
second to re-read a sentence, and maybe a few seconds to re-read from
the beginning of a paragraph. But in the listening case, it may take
you upward of a minute to go back and re-listen to a passage you
missed or didn’t understand. (Anyone who both reads books and listens
to audiobooks will relate to this.)

## Voice is more difficult to follow and retrieve

Secondly, voice messages are usually much more difficult to understand
for a recipient listening in their second or third language,
particularly if the other person is a native speaker using an accent
that is unfamiliar to them — say, a French person listening to heavily
Scots-accented English or a pronounced Australian twang. Written
messages might still have their ambiguities — as an example, the word
“doubt” meaning “question”, a common substitution in Indian English,
frequently confuses non-Indian English speakers — but those are *far*
fewer and easier to resolve for a reader.

Furthermore, until speech recognition is perfect and automatic
transcription is thus exquisitely faithful, your voice messages aren’t
searchable. You could say that they’re practically
half-off-the-record. Good luck trying to come back to an important bit
of information that someone conveyed via a voice message that you have
only a vague recollection of. Or, worse, trying to establish the
*context* in which a decision was made, and having to piece it
together from multiple voice messages.

## Voice doesn’t convey as much nuance as you think

Thirdly, the notion that you ought to be using voice messages to add
“nuance” when you can’t convey such nuance in your writing strikes me
as patently ludicrous.

When you need to convey emotion or feeling or nuance to a greater
extent than you would be able to in writing, that is *absolutely* a
situation in which you should meet with a person face-to-face,
one-on-one, and where that doesn’t permit itself, get on a video
call. At that point, when a written message won’t cut it, a voice
message absolutely won’t.

## One good use?

Now, there may be one useful use of voice messages that I can think
of: they may work for people with dyslexia, for whom consuming a lot
of writing [may cause cognitive
overload](https://a11yrules.com/podcast/kevin-mar-molinero-talks-about-dyscalculia-and-copy-pasting/). In
that case, voice messages might be a workable alternative. If so, then
that would make the option to communicate via voice message a very
valid accessibility consideration. That said, I’ve talked to people
who are dyslexic and who said that voice messages are not an adequate
substitute for interactive verbal communication to them — but that’s
of course highly anecdotal, and shouldn’t dismiss the idea outright.

However: even if voice messages are a good thing for people with
dyslexia, though, I *think* that as screen readers continuously
improve, generating speech from text may a be preferable
option. That’s because it retains the searchability advantage for
everyone, and the efficiency advantage for non-dyslexics, while also
accomodating people with dyslexia. But, I want to re-emphasize that
that’s just a hunch, and I may well be completely wrong. If you’re
dyslexic and have thoughts on this, I’d love to hear from you! Please
find me on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/xahteiwi) or
[Mastodon](https://mastodon.social/@xahteiwi).
