Title: Why do they always lie?
Date: 2020-02-04
Slug: why-do-they-always-lie
Tags: Politics
Summary: When politicians (and their supporters) keep lying even though their lies are easily exposed, it’s a strategy.

Recently I came across a tweet from my Irish OpenStack community
friend [Dave Neary](https://twitter.com/nearyd), [in which he wondered
aloud](https://twitter.com/nearyd/status/1224727999951572993) why a
picture, which was very obviously (and poorly) doctored, made its way
onto Twitter. As if, so goes the reasoning, the creator of the picture
was ass enough to assume that no-one would notice.

> It’s so obvious [...] I just don’t understand why you’d bother.

More generally, you can summarize this befuddlement by rephrasing the
question as follows: “why would anyone, in a political campaign even,
run with a lie that’s so easily called out?”

This assumes that lying, deception, is something you’d prefer to go
undetected. And generally that’s true, human behavior works exactly
that way: when we lie and deceive — and humans do this all them time
for many reasons, some of them benign — the deception only works if it
isn’t caught.

Why do they lie, when it’s so easy to tell?
-------------------------------------------

Then, what makes humans lie and spread falsehoods, even when they’re
easily detected?

I submit that to understand why, you should play a game.

The game is called [The Evolution of Trust](https://ncase.me/trust/),
and its creator is [Nicky Case](https://twitter.com/ncasenmare). You
can play it online, it’s available in multiple languages. And it will
take only about 15 minutes to complete. Go play it. No, really do.

Did you play it? No? Well [it’s here](https://ncase.me/trust/). Please
go play it.

Done? OK. Let’s carry on.

What does The Evolution of Trust tell us?
-----------------------------------------

The game-theoretical concepts that The Evolution of Trust introduces
tell you three things about its simple game of cooperation and
defection (playing by the rules vs. cheating):

* If communications between players are _perfect,_ then the most
  successful strategy is tit-for-tat (“copycat”).
  
* If communications are _imperfect,_ then the most successful strategy
  is tit-for-two-tats (or “tit for tat with forgiveness,” or
  “copykitten”) — _up to a certain error rate in communications._

* If communications are _imperfect beyond that error rate threshold,_
  then the most successful strategy is to always cheat (“cheater”).
  
Now, _real_ human communications are always messy, so the perfect
communications scenario is out the window. We’re always dealing with
imperfect communications, but we never know how high our error rate
is.

And most of us are brought up with the Golden Rule and a certain
measure of forgiveness. We tend to be “copykittens.”

But now put yourself in the shoes of someone who has decided they’ll
take the cheater role. They’ll not play by the rules, they’ll only
ever fend for themselves and their own, everyone else be
damned. They’ve chosen the asshole route.

Their problem is, they can’t win. Game theory literally tells us that
the forgiveness strategy is superior. **Except if the cheater manages
to increase the error rate beyond the threshold.**


If you’ve decided you want to be an asshole, lie. It’s your only chance.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

So once you’ve decided that you’ll not play by the rules, your only
shot at winning is to destroy communications — for everyone.

And your best shot at that is to lie. Never tell the truth, contradict
objective facts, say the stupidest, dumbest, most blatantly false
things. Small lies, large lies, medium-sized lies. It does not matter
if your lie is exposed, in fact, your lies _must_ be exposed for your
strategy to work.

And now you know how to spot someone in politics who has decided to
break the rules. And why you shouldn’t assume they’re stupid, just
because they say objectively stupid things.
